---
layout: post
title: "Support Chinese Delivery Worker Organizer Mengzhu"
date: 2021-05-01 00:00:00 +0000
categories: mengzhu
---

On February 25, 2021, a former food delivery worker and labor organizer who goes by the name of “Mengzhu” was detained by the Beijing police for organizing his fellow delivery workers. Mengzhu’s real name is Chen Guojiang, and had recently worked as a delivery worker before setting up mutual aid networks to support delivery workers. He was charged with “picking quarrels and provoking trouble”, a standard bogus charge regularly levelled against activists, on April 2, 2021, while two of his fellow delivery workers Ma Rong and Yu Ziyang remained detained. This is followed by Chinese government’s crackdown on the delivery workers’ mutual aid networks, as well as harassment of Mengzhu’s supporters engaged in the solidarity campaign. Any public discussion of Mengzhu’s detention within China has been censored, making it challenging to raise broader awareness within the country. This is why international solidarity is all the more important in keeping the limelight on the arrests as well as the conditions and organizing of Chinese delivery workers. 

Mengzhu’s organizing and the emergence of mutual aid networks arise from the fact that food delivery workers in China are trapped in a rigged system, an inevitable consequence of the new economy model, the “gig economy”. Food delivery platform oligopolies in China such as Ele.me and Meituan have constantly manipulated their algorithms to push delivery workers to deliver orders in less time and with less payment. With their income being squeezed, delivery workers in China are forced to work overtime and put their own safety at risk. Taking shortcuts and violating traffic laws are common ways that delivery workers resort to meet the short delivery time window, or they will be fined heavily by the company. Without any formal employment status, delivery workers are not able to access basic social protections and legal protection of their rights. Witnessing their plight and their spatial separation from one another, Mengzhu devoted himself to building mutual aid networks among the delivery workers who are isolated from each other, and speaking out publicly against the exploitative nature of delivery platforms. Rather than recognizing the legitimacy of delivery workers’ mutual aid organizing, the Chinese government has defended capital, and suppressed workers’ autonomous organizing and criminalized worker leaders.

Chinese food delivery workers are not alone in facing these conditions. The exploitation of delivery workers is a global phenomenon. Gig economy companies market themselves for the flexibility and freedom, while they in fact erode the protection of labor rights. Their business models rely heavily on not paying for their workers’ social protections. Without any legal recognition of the employee-employer relationship, without any laws protecting gig workers’ labor rights, gig economy companies make it easier to exploit their workers. Globally, lawmakers have often colluded with gig economy giants to prevent the passing of pro-labor legislations or the correction of the misclassification of delivery workers’ employment status. The power imbalance between gig workers and the platforms militates against delivery workers’ organizing. This is why we are seeing such similar appalling exploitation of delivery workers across the world. It’s time for delivery workers to build global unity and support each other’s common struggles. 

We demand that
 - The China government must immediately release Chen Guojiang and withdraw the criminal charge against him. 
- The gig economy companies, such as Ele.me, Meituan, Deliveroo, UberEats, DoorDash, Grubhub, Instacart, Delivery Hero, Foodpanda, iFood, must formally recognize the employee status of delivery workers.  
 - Governments should pass pro-labor regulations of gig economy companies.
 - Governments and companies should fully respect delivery workers’ right to unionize.
 - States should improve the transportation infrastructure to ensure the safety of delivery workers.
 - Trade unions should actively support delivery worker organizations and activists. In Mengzhu’s case particularly, the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) in China must take responsibility to protect workers and urge the police to release Mengzhu. 

